Update R markdown lesson (#19)
duke-malaria-collaboratory/DiscovR: _episodes_rmd/05-r-markdown.Rmd

- "To understand how to use R code chunks to include or hide code, figures, and messages."
- "To be aware of the various report formats that can be rendered using R Markdown."
keypoints:

>   - "R Markdown is a way to create a report that integrates text, code, and figures."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - "R Markdown is a useful way to create a report that integrates text, code, and figures."
```

1. [Basic components of R Markdown](#basic-components-of-r-markdown)
    + [Header](#header)
    + [Code chunks](#code-chunks)
    + [Text](#text)
1. [Starting the report](#starting-the-report)
    + [Change knit directory](#change-knit-directory)
    + [Add code](#add-code)
    + [Plot](#plot)
    + [Table](#table)
    + [Knitting](#knitting)
1. [Customizing the report](#customizing-the-report)
    + [Table format](#table-format)
    + [Messages](#messages)
    + [Code](#code)
    + [Bonus](#bonus)
1. [Formatting](#formatting)
    + [Headers](#headers)
    + [Lists](#lists)
    + [Hyperlinks](#hyperlinks)
1. [Applying it to your own data](#applying-it-to-your-own-data)

## R for data analysis review

Remember that yesterday we made a scatter plot of year vs. population, separated into a plot for each contient, and that it had 2 outliers:

```{r, message = FALSE}
library(tidyverse)
smoking <- read_csv('data/smoking_cancer.csv')

smoking %>% 
  ggplot(aes(x=year,y=pop)) +
  geom_point() +
  facet_wrap(vars(continent))
```

Write some code to figure out which countries these are (even if you already know!).

> ## Solution
> ```{r}

> > smoking %>% filter(pop > 5e8) %>% select(country) %>% unique()

Reviewer: I've been using distinct() in the data cleaning lesson, since it's a dplyr function. In this application, it doesn't matter which one you use...
```suggestion
> smoking %>% filter(pop > 5e8) %>% select(country) %>% distinct()
```

> ```

> > Here we introduced a new function: `unique()`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Here we used the `distinct()` function, which we first saw yesterday. 
```

> This function is not required to find the answer to this question, but it helps us get the answer a bit more quickly.
{: .solution}

Next, plot year vs. population separated into a plot for each continent but excluding the 2 outlier countries. Note that usually you don't want to exclude certain data points from a plot because it is misleading (see Bonus 2 for an alternative). 

> ## Solution
> ```{r}
> smoking %>% 
> filter(country != 'China') %>% 
> filter(country != 'India') %>% 
> ggplot(aes(x=year,y=pop)) +
> geom_point() +
> facet_wrap(vars(continent))
> ```

> > Another solution is to use only one filter command and separate the two true/false statements with an ampersand (`&`), which means that you want to exclude both China and India:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Another solution is to use only one filter command and separate the two true/false statements with an ampersand (`&`) or comma (`,`), which means that you want to exclude both China and India:
```

> ```{r}
> smoking %>% 
> filter(country != 'China' & country != 'India') %>% 
> ggplot(aes(x=year,y=pop)) +
> geom_point() +
> facet_wrap(vars(continent))
> ```
{: .solution}

Bonus 1: Instead of hard-coding the two countries to remove them, remove the two outliers by combining your solutions to the first two questions.

> ## Solution
> ```{r}
> smoking %>% 
> filter(pop < 5e8) %>% 
> ggplot(aes(x=year,y=pop)) +
> geom_point() +
> facet_wrap(vars(continent))
> ```
{: .solution}

Bonus 2: How can you make the differences between countries more visible on the plot without excluding the two countries you identified above?

> ## Solution
> You can scale the y axis using a log10 scale to make the differences more visible:
> ```{r}
> smoking %>% 
> ggplot(aes(x=year,y=pop)) +
> geom_point() +
> scale_y_log10() +
> facet_wrap(vars(continent))
> ```
{: .solution}

## What is R Markdown and why use it?
_[Back to top](#contents)_

> Recall that our goal is to generate a report to the United Nations on how a country's smoking rate is related to its lung cancer rate.

Reviewer: I mean...we can say United Nations, but I don't think it's necessary? It's fun in a way I guess.
```suggestion
Recall that our goal is to generate a report on how a country's smoking rate is related to its lung cancer rate.
```

Now, in a real report this is when we would type out the background and purpose of our analysis to provide context to our readers. However, since writing is not a focus of this workshop we will avoid lengthy prose and stick to short descriptions. You can copy the following text  into your own report below the package code chunk.

```

> This report was prepared to analyze the relationship between a country's lung cancer rate, smoking rate, and air pollution. Our goal is to determine to what degree the percent of people who smoke and the amount of air pollution per capita may be related to its lung cancer rate. We hypothesize that lung cancer rates increase with both percent of people who smoke and the amount of air pollution per capita.

Reviewer: Note that we didn't actually make/analyze cancer v. pollution per capita. We can leave as is, add that as an exercise, or delete from this section. Up to you!

Author: Just added an exercise at the end!

> > ## Solution
> > Italics can be generated by enclosing the text in `_` (single underscores) or `*` (single asterisks), and bold in `__` (double underscores) or `**` (double asterisks). To use both, use three instead underscores (`___`) or asterisks (`***`) instead. 
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

Okay, now how do you think we'd turn our bulleted list into a numbered list?

You can change the bullets to numbers with dots after them:

```
1. The name of your currently favorite programming language 
2. The name of a function you have so far found most useful 
3. One thing you want to learn next on your programming journey
```

Or, even better, you can just make them all `1.` and markdown will be smart enough to number them in order. This is super useful if you end up wanting to add in an item in the middle of the list:

```
1. The name of your currently favorite programming language 
1. The name of a function you have so far found most useful 
1. One thing you want to learn next on your programming journey
```

> ## Add to our report: association between air pollution and lung cancer

> > We have a pretty nice looking report, but we still haven't included anything about the association between lung cancer and air pollution per capita. Create a new code chunk and make 1) a plot with air pollution per capita on the x axis and lung cancer on the y axis, and 2) a table with summary statistics including the minimum, median, and maximum air pollution values. BONUS: Merge the table we created earlier with the table you created here with a column for smoking or air pollution, and a column for each of the summary statistics. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We have a pretty nice looking report, but we still haven't included anything about the association between lung cancer and air pollution per capita. Let's add a section to our markdown document in the following steps:
1. Make a new header and write a 1-2 sentence description of what you will be plotting.
1. Create a new code chunk
1. Make a plot with air pollution per capita on the x axis and lung cancer on the y axis
1. Make a table with summary statistics including the minimum, median, and maximum air pollution values. 
1. BONUS: Merge the table we created earlier with the table you created here with rows for smoking and air pollution, and a column for each of the summary statistics. 

```

Author: I like this!

> > ## Solution

> > > One option to create a code chunk is to type it out, you can also see other options above. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > One option to create a code chunk is to type it out. You can also see other options above. 
```

> > Then you have to read in the data and create the plot and table: 
> > ```{r}
> > smoking_pollution <- read_csv('data/smoking_pollution.csv')
> > smoking_pollution %>%

> > >   ggplot(aes(x = pollution, y = lung_cancer_pct)) + 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> >   ggplot(aes(x = pollution/pop, y = lung_cancer_pct)) + 
```

> >   geom_point() +

> > >   labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke", y = "Percent of people with lung cancer",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> >   labs(x = "Ambient pollution (micrograms/cubic meter) per capita", y = "Percent of people with lung cancer",
```

> >        title = "Are lung cancer rates associated with pollution per capita?")

> > > smoking_pollution %>% 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > 
> > smoking_pollution %>% 
```

Now, in a real report this is when we would type out the background and purpose of our analysis to provide context to our readers. However, since writing is not a focus of this workshop we will avoid lengthy prose and stick to short descriptions. You can copy the following text  into your own report below the package code chunk.

```

> This report was prepared to the attention of the United Nations. It analyzes the relationship between a country's lung cancer rate, smoking rate, and air pollution. Our goal is to determine to what degree the percent of people who smoke and the amount of air pollution may be related to its lung cancer rate. We hypothesize that lung cancer rates increase with both percent of people who smoke and the amount of air pollution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This report was prepared to analyze the relationship between a country's lung cancer rate, smoking rate, and air pollution. Our goal is to determine to what degree the percent of people who smoke and the amount of air pollution per capita may be related to its lung cancer rate. We hypothesize that lung cancer rates increase with both percent of people who smoke and the amount of air pollution per capita.
```

> > ## Calculating summary statistics
> > Perform the following steps to calculate summary statistics:
> > 1. Create a subsetted `smoking` datset including only data from 2019 an save it to the variable `smoking_2019`. 
> > 1. Look up how to use the function `n_distinct()` and use it to find the number of distinct countries in `smoking_2019`. HINT: You can pick the column you're interested in using `select()` and then pipe that to `n_distinct()`. 
> > 1. Find the minimum value of `smoke_pct` and round it to 1 decimal place.
> > 1. Find the maximum value of `smoke_pct` and round it to 1 decimal place.
> >
> > > ## Solution
> > > ```{r}
> > > smoking_2019 <- smoking %>% 
> > >   filter(year == 2019)
> > > smoking_2019 %>%
> > >   select(country) %>%
> > >   n_distinct()
> > > smoking_2019 %>%
> > >   summarise(round(min(smoke_pct), 1))
> > > smoking_2019 %>%
> > >   summarise(round(max(smoke_pct), 1)) 
> > > ```
> > {: .solution}
> {: .challenge}

> > Let's fix up the code you wrote in the previous section a bit to make it easier to use for our purposes. 

Reviewer: To shorten, I think you can get rid of the section above, and provide a little more of an intro for this section.
